README.md, before:

# HALLOC

A dead-simple heap allocator. More precisely, this is a general-purpose explicit freelist allocator.

## FEATURES

- **THREAD SAFE** -- Uses locked-wrapper pattern with `pthread_mutex_t`. Provides `_unlocked` variants for each function which you are free to use
- **DETERMINISTIC ALIGNMENT** -- All allocations and internal metadata are aligned with 8 bytes using bitwise operations
- **BLOCK SPLITTING** -- Uses first-fit search with an auto-split mechanism to minimise fragmentation
- **DEFERRED MERGING** -- `hfree()` is at O(1) thanks to deferred merging (coalesceing). Uses sweep merge only when allocator fails to find a suitable gap. 
- **TYPE ALIGNMENT** -- The pool is implemented as a `union` so that the compiler aligns it before the first allocation even occurs
- **INTROSPECTION** -- Provides `hdump()` that dumps block addresses, size & vacancy status

## LICENSE

This project is licensed under the GNU Affero General Public License version 3.0 or later.

**NO WARRANTY PROVIDED**

For full terms, see `LICENSE` file or visit **https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html**.

Commit message:

README.md: talk about my reasoning for the implementation approach

README.md, after:

# HALLOC

A dead-simple heap allocator. More precisely, this is a general-purpose explicit freelist allocator.

## FEATURES

- **THREAD SAFE** -- Uses locked-wrapper pattern with `pthread_mutex_t`. Provides `_unlocked` variants for each function which you are free to use
- **DETERMINISTIC ALIGNMENT** -- All allocations and internal metadata are aligned with 8 bytes using bitwise operations
- **BLOCK SPLITTING** -- Uses first-fit search with an auto-split mechanism to minimise fragmentation
- **DEFERRED MERGING** -- `hfree()` is at O(1) thanks to deferred merging (coalesceing). Uses sweep merge only when allocator fails to find a suitable gap. 
- **TYPE ALIGNMENT** -- The pool is implemented as a `union` so that the compiler aligns it before the first allocation even occurs
- **INTROSPECTION** -- Provides `hdump()` that dumps block addresses, size & vacancy status

## IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS

In order to maintain thread safety, the current implementation utilises a global `pthread_mutex_t` and provides wrapper functions like ordinary `halloc()`, `hrealloc()`, `hcalloc()`, etc. and its `_unlocked` variants. The ordinary ones essentially lock + call the `_unlocked` variant + unlock the mutex.

Eeven though this provides heap integrity, this approach also introduces lock contention. Basically when you have a high-concurrency environment, this global lock behaves like a single laned bridge. When you call `halloc()`, it's gonna lock the mutex and hence keep the rest of the CPU cores spinning, essentially wasting CPU cycles. Technically speaking, `pthread_mutex_lock` actually puts the thread to sleep, not spinning, it's good for power but no good for latency.

Honestly at first, I did consider writing a TLS-based implementation, but that would require me to use compiler-specific features like `__thread` or `__declspec(thread)` or move to C11. 

The compiler-specific features-based approach would potentially break compatibility across non-GNU-like C99-compliant compilers, and I certainly don't want to move to C11 either.

I then thought of considering an approach to make sort of a "hybrid" implementation, kind of like jemalloc. I was planning to utilise conditional compilation to detect compiler features and use appropriately. So like, if it were compiled with GCC or Clang, it would use `__thread`. If it were compiled with MSVC, it would use `__declspec(thread)`. If neither were the case, then it'd resort back to using pthread mutexes like it is currently.

However, doing so would make the project much more complicated than what you'd expect from a "dead-simple heap allocator".

So yeah, as mentioned earlier, the only real downside of the current approach is that the global mutex is gonna keep rest of the CPU cores spinning and literally waste CPU cycles.

## LICENSE

This project is licensed under the GNU Affero General Public License version 3.0 or later.

**NO WARRANTY PROVIDED**

For full terms, see `LICENSE` file or visit **https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html**.
